README.md, before:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
# mt.net

A .NET port of the Go-based media thumbnailing tool `mt` (media thumbnailer). This tool generates thumbnail contact sheets from video files using FFmpeg, with configurable screenshot count, layout, and styling options.

## Features

- **Video Thumbnail Generation**: Extract frames from video files and create contact sheets
- **Flexible Layout**: Configurable number of screenshots, columns, and dimensions
- **Rich Metadata**: Display file information in headers with timestamps
- **Image Filters**: Apply various filters like greyscale, sepia, invert, and more
- **Content Detection**: Skip blank or blurry frames automatically
- **Multiple Output Formats**: Save contact sheets and individual thumbnails
- **WebVTT Support**: Generate WebVTT files for HTML5 video players
- **Upload Functionality**: HTTP upload capabilities for generated images
- **Comprehensive CLI**: Feature-complete command-line interface

## Example Output

<p align="center">
  <img src="samples/rick.jpg" alt="Sample Contact Sheet">
  <br>
  <em>Example contact sheet generated from a video file</em>
</p>

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- .NET 9.0 or later
- FFmpeg (required for video processing)

### Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net.git
cd mt.net
dotnet build
```

## Quick Start

1. **Install FFmpeg** (required):

   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install ffmpeg

   # Ubuntu/Debian
   sudo apt-get install ffmpeg

   # Windows: Download from https://ffmpeg.org/download.html
   ```

2. **Build the project**:

   ```bash
   dotnet build
   ```

3. **Generate your first contact sheet**:

   ```bash
   dotnet run -- path/to/your/video.mp4
   ```

## Usage

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Generate a 3x3 grid of thumbnails (default: 4 thumbnails, 2 columns)
dotnet run -- video.mp4

# Custom layout with 9 thumbnails in 3 columns, 300px width
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --numcaps 9 --columns 3 --width 300

# Apply filters and skip blank frames
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --filter greyscale,sepia --skip-blank --header-meta

# Generate individual thumbnail images instead of contact sheet
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --single-images

# Create WebVTT file for HTML5 video players
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --vtt

# Show available filters
dotnet run -- --filters

# Show all available options
dotnet run -- --help
```

### Command Line Options

The tool provides comprehensive command-line options organized into several categories:

#### Basic Options

- `--numcaps, -n`: Number of screenshots to generate (default: 4)
- `--columns, -c`: Number of columns in the grid (default: 2)
- `--width, -w`: Width of individual thumbnails in pixels (default: 400)
- `--height`: Height of individual thumbnails in pixels (default: 0 = auto)
- `--padding, -p`: Padding between images in pixels (default: 10)
- `--output, -o`: Output filename pattern (default: `{{.Path}}{{.Name}}.jpg`)

#### Time Options

- `--interval, -i`: Time interval between captures in seconds (overrides numcaps)
- `--from`: Start time for captures (HH:MM:SS, default: 00:00:00)
- `--to, --end`: End time for captures (HH:MM:SS, default: 00:00:00)
- `--skip-credits`: Skip end credits by cutting off last 2 minutes or 10%

#### Visual Options

- `--filter`: Apply image filters (greyscale, sepia, invert, fancy, cross, strip)
- `--font, -f`: Font to use for timestamps and header (default: DroidSans.ttf)
- `--font-size`: Font size in pixels (default: 12)
- `--disable-timestamps, -d`: Disable timestamp overlay on images
- `--timestamp-opacity`: Opacity of timestamp text 0.0-1.0 (default: 1.0)
- `--header`: Include header with file information (default: true)
- `--header-meta`: Include codec, FPS, and bitrate in header
- `--header-image`: Image to display in header
- `--bg-content`: Background color for content area (R,G,B, default: 0,0,0)
- `--bg-header`: Background color for header (R,G,B, default: 0,0,0)
- `--fg-header`: Text color for header (R,G,B, default: 255,255,255)
- `--border`: Border width around thumbnails (default: 0)
- `--watermark`: Watermark image for center thumbnail
- `--watermark-all`: Watermark image for all thumbnails
- `--comment`: Comment to add to header (default: "contactsheet created with mt.net ([https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net](https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net))")

#### Processing Options

- `--skip-blank, -b`: Skip blank frames (up to 3 retries)
- `--skip-blurry`: Skip blurry frames (up to 3 retries)
- `--fast`: Use fast but less accurate seeking
- `--sfw`: Use content filtering for safe-for-work output (experimental)
- `--blur-threshold`: Threshold for blur detection 0-100 (default: 62)
- `--blank-threshold`: Threshold for blank frame detection 0-100 (default: 85)

#### Output Options

- `--single-images, -s`: Save individual images instead of contact sheet
- `--overwrite`: Overwrite existing files
- `--skip-existing`: Skip processing if output already exists
- `--vtt`: Generate WebVTT file for HTML5 video players
- `--webvtt`: Generate WebVTT with disabled headers, padding, and timestamps

#### Upload Options

- `--upload`: Upload generated files via HTTP (not yet implemented)
- `--upload-url`: URL for file upload (default: [http://example.com/upload](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ))

#### Configuration Options

- `--config`: Configuration file path
- `--save-config`: Save current settings to configuration file (not yet implemented)
- `--config-file`: Use specific configuration file (not yet implemented)
- `--show-config`: Show configuration file path and values, then exit (not yet implemented)

#### Global Options

- `--composer`: Choose image composer: `ffmpeg` (default) or `imagesharp`
- `--verbose, -v`: Enable verbose logging
- `--version`: Show version information
- `--filters`: List all available image filters

For a complete list of options, run:

```bash
dotnet run -- --help
```

## Configuration

The application supports configuration through:

1. **JSON Configuration Files**: Store settings in JSON format
2. **Environment Variables**: Use `MT_` prefix for environment variables
3. **Command Line Arguments**: Override any configuration option

### Example Configuration

```json
{
  "numCaps": 16,
  "columns": 4,
  "width": 120,
  "filters": ["greyscale"],
  "skipBlank": true,
  "headerMeta": true
}
```

## Development Status

### ✅ Completed Features

- **Project Structure**: Organized codebase with proper separation of concerns
- **Dependencies**: All required NuGet packages integrated
- **Command-Line Interface**: 100% feature parity with original Go implementation (40+ options)
  - ✅ **Bug Fix (Oct 2025)**: Resolved `-c` alias conflict (now only `--columns` uses `-c`)
- **Configuration System**: JSON config support with environment variables and CLI overrides
- **Video Processing**: ✅ **Migrated to FFmpeg.AutoGen** for direct libavcodec control and frame-level seeking
- **Image Composition**: Dual composer implementations available via `--composer` option
  - ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Composer** (default, hybrid): Uses FFmpeg filter graphs for per-frame processing (resize, text with freetype, borders, filters), ImageSharp for grid layout
  - ✅ **ImageSharp Composer** (legacy): Pure ImageSharp implementation
  - ✅ **Pixel-Perfect Text**: FFmpeg composer uses freetype for exact visual match to original Go mt
  - ✅ **Header Format**: Matches mt's multi-line structure with labels (File Name, File Size, Duration, Resolution)
  - ✅ **Dynamic Header Height**: Automatically adjusts to fit content with or without metadata
  - ✅ **Binary Units**: File sizes display in GiB/MiB (matching mt)
  - ✅ **Timestamp Format**: Always shows HH:MM:SS format (matching mt)
- **Image Filtering**: All filter types implemented (greyscale, sepia, invert, fancy, cross, strip)
- **Content Detection**: Blank and blur frame detection with configurable thresholds
- **Output Management**: File handling, WebVTT generation, and multiple output formats
- **Processing Pipeline**: Fully integrated async workflow with progress reporting
- **Testing**: Verified with real video files, layout working correctly

### 🎯 Performance Benchmarks

Performance comparison against the original Go implementation (44 thumbnails / 4 columns, 1080p video):

| Version | Mode | Time (seconds) | Speed vs Go |
|----------------|----------------|--------------|-------------|
| Go (original mt) | Normal | 10.44s | Baseline |
| Go (original mt) | Fast | 7.52s | 28% faster |
| mt.net v1 (FFMpegCore) | Normal | 58.53s | 5.6x slower ❌ |
| mt.net v1 (FFMpegCore) | Fast | 58.99s | 7.8x slower ❌ |
| **mt.net v2 (FFmpeg.AutoGen)** | **Normal** | **14.53s** | **1.4x slower ✅** |
| **mt.net v2 (FFmpeg.AutoGen)** | **Fast** | **11.07s** | **1.5x slower ✅** |

**Key Takeaway**: The FFmpeg.AutoGen migration achieved **4x performance improvement** over FFMpegCore, bringing mt.net to within ~40-50% of the original Go implementation's speed.

### 🚧 In Development / Not Yet Implemented

- **Upload Functionality**: HTTP upload feature (placeholder only)
- **Configuration Persistence**: --save-config, --config-file, --show-config (placeholders only)
- **Enhanced Logging**: Serilog integration for structured logging

### ⚠️ Known Limitations

- **Font Rendering** (ImageSharp composer only): When using `--composer imagesharp`, text rendering uses a different engine than freetype (used by FFmpeg/Go), resulting in slightly different text appearance. The default FFmpeg composer provides pixel-perfect text rendering matching the original Go implementation.

### ⚠️ Prerequisites

**FFmpeg Required**: This tool requires FFmpeg to be installed and available in your system PATH. Download from [ffmpeg.org](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html)

## Dependencies

- **System.CommandLine**: Command-line interface parsing
- **FFmpeg.AutoGen**: Direct FFmpeg bindings for video processing, frame extraction, and image composition (default)
- **SixLabors.ImageSharp**: Image manipulation and legacy composer implementation
- **SixLabors.ImageSharp.Drawing**: Drawing operations for legacy composer
- **SixLabors.Fonts**: Text rendering for legacy composer
- **Microsoft.Extensions.Configuration**: Configuration management
- **Serilog**: Structured logging (planned)

## Contributing

This project is a .NET port of the original Go implementation. The original source code is available in the `reference/original-mt/` directory for reference during development.

### Development Commands

```bash
# Build the project
dotnet build

# Run the application
dotnet run

# Build for release
dotnet build --configuration Release

# Run tests
dotnet test
```

### Project Structure

```text
mt.net/
├── Commands/           # CLI command definitions (RootCommand.cs)
├── Configuration/      # Configuration management (AppConfig, ConfigurationBuilder)
├── Models/            # Data models (ThumbnailOptions, HeaderInfo, ImageFilter)
├── Services/          # Business logic services
│   ├── VideoProcessor.cs          # Video metadata and frame extraction
│   ├── ImageComposer.cs           # Contact sheet creation
│   ├── FilterService.cs           # Image filters
│   ├── ContentDetectionService.cs # Blank/blur detection
│   └── OutputService.cs           # File saving and WebVTT
├── Utilities/         # Helper utilities (ColorParser, TimeSpanParser, FileValidator)
└── reference/         # Original Go implementation
```

## How It Works

1. **Video Analysis**: Extracts video metadata (resolution, duration, codec, fps, bitrate)
2. **Timestamp Calculation**: Determines optimal frame positions based on video duration and options
3. **Frame Extraction**: Uses FFmpeg to capture frames at calculated timestamps
4. **Content Detection**: Optionally skips blank or blurry frames (with retry logic)
5. **Filter Application**: Applies visual effects (greyscale, sepia, fancy rotation, etc.)
6. **Contact Sheet Creation**: Arranges thumbnails in a grid with customizable layout
7. **Header Generation**: Adds metadata header with file information
8. **Timestamp Overlay**: Adds time codes to each thumbnail
9. **Output**: Saves final contact sheet and optionally generates WebVTT file

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Future Roadmap

### High Priority

1. ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Migration** - COMPLETED
   - Migrated from FFMpegCore to FFmpeg.AutoGen for better performance
   - Achieved 4x performance improvement
   - Implemented true fast seeking behavior with direct libavcodec control
   - ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Composer** - COMPLETED (default as of v2.0, hybrid approach)
     - Pixel-perfect text rendering with freetype matching original Go implementation
     - Uses FFmpeg filter graphs (scale, drawtext, drawbox) for per-frame processing
     - Uses ImageSharp for grid layout composition (simple, maintainable)
     - Available via `--composer ffmpeg` (default) or legacy `--composer imagesharp`
     - Best of both worlds: exact rendering + clean code architecture

### Medium Priority

1. **Upload Service** - Implement HTTP upload functionality for generated contact sheets
2. **Configuration Management** - Implement save/load configuration file features
3. **Enhanced Logging** - Integrate Serilog for structured, configurable logging
4. **Performance Optimization** - Further optimize to close the remaining ~40% performance gap with Go

### Low Priority

1. **Unit Testing** - Add comprehensive test coverage
2. **Documentation** - Expand usage examples and troubleshooting guides
3. **Code Cleanup** - Remove legacy ImageSharp composer after migration period (keeping as fallback temporarily)

### Future Considerations

1. ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen for Image Composition** - COMPLETED (v2.0 - Hybrid Approach)
   - Successfully migrated critical operations to FFmpeg's filter graphs
   - **FFmpeg.AutoGen handles**: Frame resizing, text rendering (freetype), borders, image filters
   - **ImageSharp handles**: Grid layout, canvas creation, watermarks (simpler in C#)
   - Achieves pixel-perfect text rendering matching mt (uses freetype)
   - Available as default composer, with ImageSharp as legacy fallback
   - Hybrid approach is intentional and optimal - full FFmpeg migration possible but not necessary
   - Legacy ImageSharp composer will be removed after migration period

## Acknowledgments

This project is based on the original `mt` tool written in Go. Thanks to the original developer for creating such a useful media processing utility.

Commit message:

WebVTT feature parity with original Go implementation
Implement dual timestamp system to correctly generate WebVTT files for
HTML5 video players. Frame extraction uses (numCaps+1) spacing to avoid
exact video end where FFmpeg cannot extract frames, while VTT display
timestamps use even spacing across full video duration for proper seeking.

Key changes:
- Add --webvtt option override logic (auto-disables headers, padding, timestamps)
- Fix VTT coordinate calculations to include header height and padding offsets
- Build separate VTT timestamps array spanning 00:00:00 to video duration
- Update font default from Roboto-Regular.ttf to DroidSans (wildcard search)
- Document WebVTT implementation pattern in README, AGENTS, and Copilot docs

The critical insight is that frame extraction and VTT timestamps serve
different purposes and must be calculated differently for correct behavior.

README.md, after:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
# mt.net

A .NET port of the Go-based media thumbnailing tool `mt` (media thumbnailer). This tool generates thumbnail contact sheets from video files using FFmpeg, with configurable screenshot count, layout, and styling options.

## Features

- **Video Thumbnail Generation**: Extract frames from video files and create contact sheets
- **Flexible Layout**: Configurable number of screenshots, columns, and dimensions
- **Rich Metadata**: Display file information in headers with timestamps
- **Image Filters**: Apply various filters like greyscale, sepia, invert, and more
- **Content Detection**: Skip blank or blurry frames automatically
- **Multiple Output Formats**: Save contact sheets and individual thumbnails
- **WebVTT Support**: Generate WebVTT files for HTML5 video players
- **Dual Composer System**: FFmpeg.AutoGen (default) or ImageSharp for image composition
- **Comprehensive CLI**: Feature-complete command-line interface with 40+ options

## Example Output

<p align="center">
  <img src="samples/rick.jpg" alt="Sample Contact Sheet">
  <br>
  <em>Example contact sheet generated from a video file</em>
</p>

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- .NET 9.0 or later
- FFmpeg (required for video processing)

### Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net.git
cd mt.net
dotnet build
```

## Quick Start

1. **Install FFmpeg** (required):

   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install ffmpeg

   # Ubuntu/Debian
   sudo apt-get install ffmpeg

   # Windows: Download from https://ffmpeg.org/download.html
   ```

2. **Build the project**:

   ```bash
   dotnet build
   ```

3. **Generate your first contact sheet**:

   ```bash
   dotnet run -- path/to/your/video.mp4
   ```

## Usage

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Generate a 3x3 grid of thumbnails (default: 4 thumbnails, 2 columns)
dotnet run -- video.mp4

# Custom layout with 9 thumbnails in 3 columns, 300px width
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --numcaps 9 --columns 3 --width 300

# Apply filters and skip blank frames
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --filter greyscale,sepia --skip-blank --header-meta

# Generate individual thumbnail images instead of contact sheet
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --single-images

# Create WebVTT file for HTML5 video players
dotnet run -- video.mp4 --vtt

# Show available filters
dotnet run -- --filters

# Show all available options
dotnet run -- --help
```

### Command Line Options

The tool provides comprehensive command-line options organized into several categories:

#### Basic Options

- `--numcaps, -n`: Number of screenshots to generate (default: 4)
- `--columns, -c`: Number of columns in the grid (default: 2)
- `--width, -w`: Width of individual thumbnails in pixels (default: 400)
- `--height`: Height of individual thumbnails in pixels (default: 0 = auto)
- `--padding, -p`: Padding between images in pixels (default: 10)
- `--output, -o`: Output filename pattern (default: `{{.Path}}{{.Name}}.jpg`)

#### Time Options

- `--interval, -i`: Time interval between captures in seconds (overrides numcaps)
- `--from`: Start time for captures (HH:MM:SS, default: 00:00:00)
- `--to, --end`: End time for captures (HH:MM:SS, default: 00:00:00)
- `--skip-credits`: Skip end credits by cutting off last 2 minutes or 10%

#### Visual Options

- `--filter`: Apply image filters (greyscale, sepia, invert, fancy, cross, strip)
- `--font, -f`: Font to use for timestamps and header (default: DroidSans)
- `--font-size`: Font size in pixels (default: 12)
- `--disable-timestamps, -d`: Disable timestamp overlay on images
- `--timestamp-opacity`: Opacity of timestamp text 0.0-1.0 (default: 1.0)
- `--header`: Include header with file information (default: true)
- `--header-meta`: Include codec, FPS, and bitrate in header
- `--header-image`: Image to display in header
- `--bg-content`: Background color for content area (R,G,B, default: 0,0,0)
- `--bg-header`: Background color for header (R,G,B, default: 0,0,0)
- `--fg-header`: Text color for header (R,G,B, default: 255,255,255)
- `--border`: Border width around thumbnails (default: 0)
- `--watermark`: Watermark image for center thumbnail
- `--watermark-all`: Watermark image for all thumbnails
- `--comment`: Comment to add to header (default: "contactsheet created with mt.net ([https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net](https://github.com/nathanpbutler/mt.net))")

#### Processing Options

- `--skip-blank, -b`: Skip blank frames (up to 3 retries)
- `--skip-blurry`: Skip blurry frames (up to 3 retries)
- `--fast`: Use fast but less accurate seeking
- `--sfw`: Use content filtering for safe-for-work output (experimental)
- `--blur-threshold`: Threshold for blur detection 0-100 (default: 62)
- `--blank-threshold`: Threshold for blank frame detection 0-100 (default: 85)

#### Output Options

- `--single-images, -s`: Save individual images instead of contact sheet
- `--overwrite`: Overwrite existing files
- `--skip-existing`: Skip processing if output already exists
- `--vtt`: Generate WebVTT file for HTML5 video players
- `--webvtt`: Generate WebVTT with disabled headers, padding, and timestamps

#### Upload Options

- `--upload`: Upload generated files via HTTP (**placeholder only - not implemented**)
- `--upload-url`: URL for file upload (default: <http://example.com/upload>) (**placeholder only - not implemented**)

#### Configuration Options

- `--config`: Configuration file path
- `--save-config`: Save current settings to configuration file (**placeholder only - not implemented**)
- `--config-file`: Use specific configuration file (**placeholder only - not implemented**)
- `--show-config`: Show configuration file path and values, then exit (**placeholder only - not implemented**)

#### Global Options

- `--composer`: Choose image composer: `ffmpeg` (default) or `imagesharp`
- `--verbose, -v`: Enable verbose logging
- `--version`: Show version information
- `--filters`: List all available image filters

For a complete list of options, run:

```bash
dotnet run -- --help
```

## Configuration

The application supports configuration through:

1. **JSON Configuration Files**: Store settings in JSON format
2. **Environment Variables**: Use `MT_` prefix for environment variables
3. **Command Line Arguments**: Override any configuration option

### Example Configuration

```json
{
  "numCaps": 16,
  "columns": 4,
  "width": 120,
  "filters": ["greyscale"],
  "skipBlank": true,
  "headerMeta": true
}
```

## Development Status

### ✅ Completed Features

- **Project Structure**: Organized codebase with proper separation of concerns
- **Dependencies**: All required NuGet packages integrated
- **Command-Line Interface**: 100% feature parity with original Go implementation (40+ options)
  - ✅ **Bug Fix (Oct 2025)**: Resolved `-c` alias conflict (now only `--columns` uses `-c`)
- **Configuration System**: JSON config support with environment variables and CLI overrides
- **Video Processing**: ✅ **Migrated to FFmpeg.AutoGen** for direct libavcodec control and frame-level seeking
- **Image Composition**: Dual composer implementations available via `--composer` option
  - ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Composer** (default, hybrid): Uses FFmpeg filter graphs for per-frame processing (resize, text with freetype, borders, filters), ImageSharp for grid layout
  - ✅ **ImageSharp Composer** (legacy): Pure ImageSharp implementation
  - ✅ **Pixel-Perfect Text**: FFmpeg composer uses freetype for exact visual match to original Go mt
  - ✅ **Header Format**: Matches mt's multi-line structure with labels (File Name, File Size, Duration, Resolution)
  - ✅ **Dynamic Header Height**: Automatically adjusts to fit content with or without metadata
  - ✅ **Binary Units**: File sizes display in GiB/MiB (matching mt)
  - ✅ **Timestamp Format**: Always shows HH:MM:SS format (matching mt)
- **Image Filtering**: All filter types implemented (greyscale, sepia, invert, fancy, cross, strip)
- **Content Detection**: Blank and blur frame detection with configurable thresholds
- **Output Management**: File handling, WebVTT generation, and multiple output formats
  - ✅ **WebVTT Generation**: Full feature parity with original Go implementation
    - `--vtt`: Generate WebVTT files with correct coordinate mapping (xywh format)
    - `--webvtt`: Shorthand that auto-disables headers, padding, and timestamps for optimal HTML5 video player compatibility
    - **Dual Timestamp System**: Frame extraction timestamps (avoid video end) vs. VTT display timestamps (even spacing across full duration)
    - **Accurate Coordinates**: Proper calculation including header height and padding offsets
    - **Time Range Coverage**: VTT cues span from 00:00:00 to video duration with evenly-spaced intervals
- **Processing Pipeline**: Fully integrated async workflow with progress reporting
- **Testing**: Verified with real video files, layout working correctly

### 🎯 Performance Benchmarks

Performance comparison against the original Go implementation (44 thumbnails / 4 columns, 1080p video):

| Version | Mode | Time (seconds) | Speed vs Go |
|----------------|----------------|--------------|-------------|
| Go (original mt) | Normal | 10.44s | Baseline |
| Go (original mt) | Fast | 7.52s | 28% faster |
| mt.net v1 (FFMpegCore) | Normal | 58.53s | 5.6x slower ❌ |
| mt.net v1 (FFMpegCore) | Fast | 58.99s | 7.8x slower ❌ |
| **mt.net v2 (FFmpeg.AutoGen)** | **Normal** | **14.53s** | **1.4x slower ✅** |
| **mt.net v2 (FFmpeg.AutoGen)** | **Fast** | **11.07s** | **1.5x slower ✅** |

**Key Takeaway**: The FFmpeg.AutoGen migration achieved **4x performance improvement** over FFMpegCore, bringing mt.net to within ~40-50% of the original Go implementation's speed.

### 🚧 Not Implemented (Placeholders Only)

- **Upload Functionality**: HTTP upload feature (--upload, --upload-url) - placeholders present in CLI but no implementation or timeline
- **Configuration Persistence**: --save-config, --config-file, --show-config - placeholders present in CLI but no implementation or timeline
- **Enhanced Logging**: Serilog is included but not fully integrated for structured logging

### ⚠️ Known Limitations

- **Font Rendering** (ImageSharp composer only): When using `--composer imagesharp`, text rendering uses a different engine than freetype (used by FFmpeg/Go), resulting in slightly different text appearance. The default FFmpeg composer provides pixel-perfect text rendering matching the original Go implementation.
- **--filters Flag**: The `--filters` option to list available filters currently requires a dummy file argument due to System.CommandLine argument validation. Example workaround: Use `--help` to see available options, or provide any path with the flag.

### ⚠️ Prerequisites

**FFmpeg Required**: This tool requires FFmpeg to be installed and available in your system PATH. Download from [ffmpeg.org](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html)

## Dependencies

- **System.CommandLine**: Command-line interface parsing
- **FFmpeg.AutoGen**: Direct FFmpeg bindings for video processing, frame extraction, and image composition (default)
- **SixLabors.ImageSharp**: Image manipulation and legacy composer implementation
- **SixLabors.ImageSharp.Drawing**: Drawing operations for legacy composer
- **SixLabors.Fonts**: Text rendering for legacy composer
- **Microsoft.Extensions.Configuration**: Configuration management
- **Serilog**: Structured logging (planned)

## Contributing

This project is a .NET port of the original Go implementation. The original source code is available in the `reference/original-mt/` directory for reference during development.

### Development Commands

```bash
# Build the project
dotnet build

# Run the application
dotnet run

# Build for release
dotnet build --configuration Release

# Run tests
dotnet test
```

### Project Structure

```text
mt.net/
├── Commands/           # CLI command definitions (RootCommand.cs)
├── Configuration/      # Configuration management (AppConfig, ConfigurationBuilder)
├── Models/            # Data models (ThumbnailOptions, HeaderInfo, ImageFilter)
├── Services/          # Business logic services
│   ├── VideoProcessor.cs          # Video metadata and frame extraction
│   ├── ImageComposer.cs           # Contact sheet creation
│   ├── FilterService.cs           # Image filters
│   ├── ContentDetectionService.cs # Blank/blur detection
│   └── OutputService.cs           # File saving and WebVTT
├── Utilities/         # Helper utilities (ColorParser, TimeSpanParser, FileValidator)
└── reference/         # Original Go implementation
```

## How It Works

1. **Video Analysis**: Extracts video metadata (resolution, duration, codec, fps, bitrate)
2. **Timestamp Calculation**: Determines optimal frame positions based on video duration and options
3. **Frame Extraction**: Uses FFmpeg to capture frames at calculated timestamps
4. **Content Detection**: Optionally skips blank or blurry frames (with retry logic)
5. **Filter Application**: Applies visual effects (greyscale, sepia, fancy rotation, etc.)
6. **Contact Sheet Creation**: Arranges thumbnails in a grid with customizable layout
7. **Header Generation**: Adds metadata header with file information
8. **Timestamp Overlay**: Adds time codes to each thumbnail
9. **Output**: Saves final contact sheet and optionally generates WebVTT file

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Future Roadmap

### High Priority

1. ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Migration** - COMPLETED
   - Migrated from FFMpegCore to FFmpeg.AutoGen for better performance
   - Achieved 4x performance improvement
   - Implemented true fast seeking behavior with direct libavcodec control
   - ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen Composer** - COMPLETED (default as of v2.0, hybrid approach)
     - Pixel-perfect text rendering with freetype matching original Go implementation
     - Uses FFmpeg filter graphs (scale, drawtext, drawbox) for per-frame processing
     - Uses ImageSharp for grid layout composition (simple, maintainable)
     - Available via `--composer ffmpeg` (default) or legacy `--composer imagesharp`
     - Best of both worlds: exact rendering + clean code architecture

### Medium Priority

1. **Upload Service** - Implement HTTP upload functionality for generated contact sheets
2. **Configuration Management** - Implement save/load configuration file features
3. **Enhanced Logging** - Integrate Serilog for structured, configurable logging
4. **Performance Optimization** - Further optimize to close the remaining ~40% performance gap with Go

### Low Priority

1. **Unit Testing** - Add comprehensive test coverage
2. **Documentation** - Expand usage examples and troubleshooting guides
3. **Code Cleanup** - Remove legacy ImageSharp composer after migration period (keeping as fallback temporarily)

### Future Considerations

1. ✅ **FFmpeg.AutoGen for Image Composition** - COMPLETED (v2.0 - Hybrid Approach)
   - Successfully migrated critical operations to FFmpeg's filter graphs
   - **FFmpeg.AutoGen handles**: Frame resizing, text rendering (freetype), borders, image filters
   - **ImageSharp handles**: Grid layout, canvas creation, watermarks (simpler in C#)
   - Achieves pixel-perfect text rendering matching mt (uses freetype)
   - Available as default composer, with ImageSharp as legacy fallback
   - Hybrid approach is intentional and optimal - full FFmpeg migration possible but not necessary
   - Legacy ImageSharp composer will be removed after migration period

## Acknowledgments

This project is based on the original `mt` tool written in Go. Thanks to the original developer for creating such a useful media processing utility.
